src/05-derivatives/04-structural-derivatives.md, before:

# Anatomical (structural) derivatives

## Reconstructed surfaces

A surface is defined by three-dimensional coordinates, or vertices, and a set of triangles,
or triplets of indices into the coordinate array.

Surfaces MUST be stored as GIFTI files, with one surface per file.
For structures with hemispheres, the `hemi-` entity SHOULD be used to distinguish the
surfaces corresponding to each hemisphere.

Template:

```Text
<pipeline_name>/
    sub-<label>/
        anat/
            <source_entities>[_hemi-{L|R}][_space-<label>][_den-<label>][_desc-<label>]_<suffix>.surf.gii
```

Example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_hemi-L_pial.surf.gii
            sub-001_hemi-R_pial.surf.gii
```

The supported surface types (`<suffix>`) are:

| `<suffix>`   | Description                                                          |
| ------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| wm           | The gray matter / white matter border for the cortex                 |
| smoothwm     | The smoothed gray matter / white matter border                       |
| pial         | The gray matter / pial matter border                                 |
| midthickness | The midpoints between `wm` and `pial` surfaces                       |
| inflated     | An inflation of the midthickness surface (useful for visualization)  |
| vinflated    | A very-inflated midthicknesss surface (also for visualization)       |
| sphere       | The sphere (used for registration - see transforms for nomenclature) |
| flat         | The flattened surface (used for visualization)                       |

`space` filename keyword is restricted to
[Surface Coordinate Spaces](../99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.md#Surface)
and `volspace` corresponds to the 3D coordinate space described in
[Volume Coordinate Spaces](../99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.md#Volume). In
contrast to other derivatives the sidecar metadata field `SpatialReference` (see
[Introduction](01-introduction.md#Common-file-level-metadata-fields)) is not
required for any space, but is recommended when `volspace` is set to
`individual`. In such case it should point to the volume defining the 3D
coordinate system with witch the surface mesh is aligned with.

## Surface-Mapped Anatomical Scalar Derivatives

Surface-mapped scalar overlays should be stored as either GIFTI or CIFTI files
(which allow for the combination of left and right hemispheres).

Template:

```Text
<pipeline_name>/
    sub-<participant_label>/
        anat/
            <source_keywords>[_hemi-{L|R}][_space-<space>][_desc-<label>]_<suffix>.{shape.gii|dscalar.nii}
```

The REQUIRED extension for scalar GIFTI files is `.shape.gii`. The `hemi` key is
required for GIFTI files. For example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_hemi-L_curv.shape.gii
            sub-001_hemi-R_curv.shape.gii
```

The REQUIRED extension for scalar CIFTI files is `.dscalar.nii`. For example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_curv.dscalar.nii
```

The file `<suffix>` MUST be one of the following values:

| `<suffix>`   | Description                                           |
| ------------ | ----------------------------------------------------- |
| `curv`       | Cortical surface curvature indices                    |
| `thickness`  | Cortical thickness                                    |
| `area`       | Discretized surface area across regions               |
| `dist`       | Distance from a point                                 |
| `defects`    | Marked regions with surface defects                   |
| `sulc`       | Sulcal depth                                          |
| `myelinmap`  | Myelin map calculated from T1w to T2w ratio           |
| `distortion` | Distortion map calculated from a surface registration |

## Morphometrics

Structural statistics produced by segmentation routines should be stored within
tsv files, which could contain common parameters specified in the table below.

Template:

```Text
<pipeline_name>/
    sub-<participant_label>/
        func|anat|dwi/
            <source_keywords>[_desc-<label>]_morph.tsv

```

Example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_desc-volumetric_morph.tsv
```

| Column name | Description                                     |
| ----------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| index       | RECOMMENDED. Label integer index                |
| name        | RECOMMENDED. Structure name                     |
| centroid    | OPTIONAL. Center coordinate of structure        |
| volume      | OPTIONAL. Volume of structure                   |
| intensity   | OPTIONAL. Intensity of voxels within structure  |
| thickness   | OPTIONAL. Thickness of cortical structure       |
| area        | OPTIONAL. Surface area of cortical structure    |
| curv        | OPTIONAL. Curvature index of cortical structure |

Some parameters might require unit specification or have multiple associated
statistics (such as avg, std, min, max, range). The suggested syntax for such
columns is `<parameter>[-<stat>][-<units>]`. An example volumetric stats file
might look something like this:

```Text
index  name               volume-mm3  intensity-avg  intensity-std
11     Brainstem          23415.9     80.11          3.40
32     Left-Hippocampus   5349.7      75.23          2.27
32     Right-Hippocampus  4112.1      76.98          4.01
```

Commit message:

Rewrite surface preface, drop space

src/05-derivatives/04-structural-derivatives.md, after:

# Anatomical (structural) derivatives

## Reconstructed surfaces

A surface is defined by three-dimensional vertex coordinates, and a set of triangles,
or triplets of indices into the coordinate array.
Surfaces MUST be stored as [GIFTI] surface files, with one surface per file.

For structures with hemispheres, the `hemi-` entity SHOULD be used to distinguish the
surface files corresponding to each hemisphere.
For example, reconstructions of the cortical sheet are typically split into two disjoing
surfaces.

Template:

```Text
<pipeline_name>/
    sub-<label>/
        anat/
            <source_entities>[_hemi-{L|R}][_den-<label>][_desc-<label>]_<suffix>.surf.gii
```

Example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_hemi-L_pial.surf.gii
            sub-001_hemi-R_pial.surf.gii
```

The supported surface types (`<suffix>`) are:

| `<suffix>`   | Description                                                          |
| ------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| wm           | The gray matter / white matter border for the cortex                 |
| smoothwm     | The smoothed gray matter / white matter border                       |
| pial         | The gray matter / pial matter border                                 |
| midthickness | The midpoints between `wm` and `pial` surfaces                       |
| inflated     | An inflation of the midthickness surface (useful for visualization)  |
| vinflated    | A very-inflated midthicknesss surface (also for visualization)       |
| sphere       | The sphere (used for registration - see transforms for nomenclature) |
| flat         | The flattened surface (used for visualization)                       |

`space` filename keyword is restricted to
[Surface Coordinate Spaces](../99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.md#Surface)
and `volspace` corresponds to the 3D coordinate space described in
[Volume Coordinate Spaces](../99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.md#Volume). In
contrast to other derivatives the sidecar metadata field `SpatialReference` (see
[Introduction](01-introduction.md#Common-file-level-metadata-fields)) is not
required for any space, but is recommended when `volspace` is set to
`individual`. In such case it should point to the volume defining the 3D
coordinate system with witch the surface mesh is aligned with.

## Surface-Mapped Anatomical Scalar Derivatives

Surface-mapped scalar overlays should be stored as either GIFTI or CIFTI files
(which allow for the combination of left and right hemispheres).

Template:

```Text
<pipeline_name>/
    sub-<participant_label>/
        anat/
            <source_keywords>[_hemi-{L|R}][_space-<space>][_desc-<label>]_<suffix>.{shape.gii|dscalar.nii}
```

The REQUIRED extension for scalar GIFTI files is `.shape.gii`. The `hemi` key is
required for GIFTI files. For example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_hemi-L_curv.shape.gii
            sub-001_hemi-R_curv.shape.gii
```

The REQUIRED extension for scalar CIFTI files is `.dscalar.nii`. For example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_curv.dscalar.nii
```

The file `<suffix>` MUST be one of the following values:

| `<suffix>`   | Description                                           |
| ------------ | ----------------------------------------------------- |
| `curv`       | Cortical surface curvature indices                    |
| `thickness`  | Cortical thickness                                    |
| `area`       | Discretized surface area across regions               |
| `dist`       | Distance from a point                                 |
| `defects`    | Marked regions with surface defects                   |
| `sulc`       | Sulcal depth                                          |
| `myelinmap`  | Myelin map calculated from T1w to T2w ratio           |
| `distortion` | Distortion map calculated from a surface registration |

## Morphometrics

Structural statistics produced by segmentation routines should be stored within
tsv files, which could contain common parameters specified in the table below.

Template:

```Text
<pipeline_name>/
    sub-<participant_label>/
        func|anat|dwi/
            <source_keywords>[_desc-<label>]_morph.tsv

```

Example:

```Text
pipeline/
    sub-001/
        anat/
            sub-001_desc-volumetric_morph.tsv
```

| Column name | Description                                     |
| ----------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| index       | RECOMMENDED. Label integer index                |
| name        | RECOMMENDED. Structure name                     |
| centroid    | OPTIONAL. Center coordinate of structure        |
| volume      | OPTIONAL. Volume of structure                   |
| intensity   | OPTIONAL. Intensity of voxels within structure  |
| thickness   | OPTIONAL. Thickness of cortical structure       |
| area        | OPTIONAL. Surface area of cortical structure    |
| curv        | OPTIONAL. Curvature index of cortical structure |

Some parameters might require unit specification or have multiple associated
statistics (such as avg, std, min, max, range). The suggested syntax for such
columns is `<parameter>[-<stat>][-<units>]`. An example volumetric stats file
might look something like this:

```Text
index  name               volume-mm3  intensity-avg  intensity-std
11     Brainstem          23415.9     80.11          3.40
32     Left-Hippocampus   5349.7      75.23          2.27
32     Right-Hippocampus  4112.1      76.98          4.01
```

[GIFTI]: https://www.nitrc.org/frs/download.php/2871/GIFTI_Surface_Format.pdf
